README.md, before:

# MonetDB Docker

Docker container for [MonetDB](https://www.monetdb.org/).

## Usage

The simplest way to start a MonetDB container is to use the images
published on [Docker
Hub](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/monetdb/monetdb/tags).

```
docker run -P -it monetdb/monetdb:latest
```

This command will start a container from the latest tagged image on
docker hub and it will map a random port on localhost to the port 50000
where the MonetDB daemon is listening for connections (the effect of the
`-P` flag). Alternatively you can specify the port on the local host
using the flag `-p`.

The docker image creates the database farm on the directory
`/var/monetdb5/dbfarm/` in the container the first time it starts. You
can mount a local directory on that path in the container in order to
have access to the data from the local host.

The image accepts a number of parameters in the form of environment
variables (i.e. passed using the `-e` docker flag) that will configure
the behavior of the container.

- **MDB_FARM_DIR**
    
    The location of the database farm. Defaults to `/var/monetdb5/dbfarm`.

- **MDB_DAEMON_PASS**
    
    This is the passphrase used to manage the farm from outside the
    container. For example:
    ```
    monetdb -h localhost -P <passphrase> create SF-1
    ```
    See also `MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE`, which may be more secure. If
    neither `MDB_DAEMON_PASS` nor `MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE` are set, the
    farm cannot be managed from outside the container

- **MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE**
   
    Variant of `MDB_DAEMON_PASS`. Path to a file inside the container
    that contains the daemon password on the first line. This can be
    used for example with [Docker swarm
    secrets](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/secrets/#how-docker-manages-secrets)
    or [Kubernetes secrets
    management](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-secrets-as-files-from-a-pod),
    or manually by mounting a volume that contains the password file.

- **MDB_LOGFILE**
    
    The file where the daemon should write the log messages. By default
    it's the file `merovingian.log` in the database farm directory in
    the container.

- **MDB_SNAPSHOT_DIR**
    
    This is the directory in the container where database snapshots will
    be written. If no value is given the daemon will not produce any
    snapshots. You can mount a local directory in order to have access
    to the snapshots from the local host.

- **MDB_SNAPSHOT_COMPRESSION**
     
    This specifies the compression algorithm to be used for snapshot
    files. Default value is `.tar.lz4`, other possible values are
    `.tar`, `.tar.gz`, `.tar.xz` and `.tar.bz2`.

- **MDB_CREATE_DBS**
    
    This specifies databases to be created the first time the container
    comes up. You can specify multiple databases by separating their
    names with a single comma character (no spaces between them):
    ```
    [...] -e MDB_CREATE_DBS=db1,db2,db3 [...]
    ```
    The default is `monetdb`. If this variable is not empty,
    `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS` must also be set.

- **MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS**
    
    The password to use for the `monetdb` (admin) user in the databases
    created through `MDB_CREATE_DBS`. Note that all the databases get
    the same admin password. See also `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS_FILE`, which
    may be more secure. If neither `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS` nor
    `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS_FILE` are set, `MDB_CREATE_DBS` must be set to
    the empty string.

- **MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS_FILE**
   
    Variant of `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS`. Path to a file inside the container
    that contains the daemon password on the first line. This can be
    used for example with [Docker swarm
    secrets](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/secrets/#how-docker-manages-secrets)
    or [Kubernetes secrets
    management](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-secrets-as-files-from-a-pod),
    or manually by mounting a volume that contains the password file.

- **MDB_FARM_PROPERTIES**
      
    A comma separated list of entries `key=value` to pass to the
    database farm. This is used in order to set properties like `port`,
    `exittimeout` etc. See [monetdbd manual
    page](https://www.monetdb.org/documentation-Jul2021/admin-guide/manpages/monetdbd/)
    for the full list of properties. Please note that the properties
    `listenaddr`, `control` and `passphrase` are not affected by this
    variable. `listenaddr` is always set to `all`, and the other two are
    set appropriately by setting the variable `MDB_DAEMON_PASS` or
    `MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE`.

- **MDB_DB_PROPERTIES**
   
    A comma separated list of entries `key=value` to pass to every
    database specified in `MDB_CREATE_DBS`. See the documentation of the
    `set` sub-command in the [monetdb manual
    page](https://www.monetdb.org/documentation/admin-guide/manpages/monetdb/)
    for the full list of properties.

### Note

There are situations where error messages produced at the startup of the
container are not immediately visible. For example when using Github
Actions, any error messages are shown at the end of the job in the
section _Stop containers_.

Another similar situation is at the command line when the container is
created in two steps using the commands `docker create` and `docker
start`. In that case you can access the error messages using the command
`docker logs <container name>`.

### Access

Once the image is running you can get a shell in it:
```
docker exec -it <image_name> bash
```

## Building the image manually

Clone this git [repository](https://github.com/MonetDBSolutions/monetdb-docker) and run:
```
docker build . -t <local tag>
```

Then you can use the image you just built as described in section
_Usage_ above.

Commit message:

Adds github repo link in README

README.md, after:

# MonetDB Docker

Docker container for [MonetDB](https://www.monetdb.org/). Dockerfile and
scripts can be found the [MonetDB Docker
repo](https://github.com/MonetDBSolutions/monetdb-docker).

## Usage

The simplest way to start a MonetDB container is to use the images
published on [Docker
Hub](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/monetdb/monetdb/tags).

```
docker run -P -it monetdb/monetdb:latest
```

This command will start a container from the latest tagged image on
docker hub and it will map a random port on localhost to the port 50000
where the MonetDB daemon is listening for connections (the effect of the
`-P` flag). Alternatively you can specify the port on the local host
using the flag `-p`.

The docker image creates the database farm on the directory
`/var/monetdb5/dbfarm/` in the container the first time it starts. You
can mount a local directory on that path in the container in order to
have access to the data from the local host.

The image accepts a number of parameters in the form of environment
variables (i.e. passed using the `-e` docker flag) that will configure
the behavior of the container.

- **MDB_FARM_DIR**
    
    The location of the database farm. Defaults to `/var/monetdb5/dbfarm`.

- **MDB_DAEMON_PASS**
    
    This is the passphrase used to manage the farm from outside the
    container. For example:
    ```
    monetdb -h localhost -P <passphrase> create SF-1
    ```
    See also `MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE`, which may be more secure. If
    neither `MDB_DAEMON_PASS` nor `MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE` are set, the
    farm cannot be managed from outside the container

- **MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE**
   
    Variant of `MDB_DAEMON_PASS`. Path to a file inside the container
    that contains the daemon password on the first line. This can be
    used for example with [Docker swarm
    secrets](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/secrets/#how-docker-manages-secrets)
    or [Kubernetes secrets
    management](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-secrets-as-files-from-a-pod),
    or manually by mounting a volume that contains the password file.

- **MDB_LOGFILE**
    
    The file where the daemon should write the log messages. By default
    it's the file `merovingian.log` in the database farm directory in
    the container.

- **MDB_SNAPSHOT_DIR**
    
    This is the directory in the container where database snapshots will
    be written. If no value is given the daemon will not produce any
    snapshots. You can mount a local directory in order to have access
    to the snapshots from the local host.

- **MDB_SNAPSHOT_COMPRESSION**
     
    This specifies the compression algorithm to be used for snapshot
    files. Default value is `.tar.lz4`, other possible values are
    `.tar`, `.tar.gz`, `.tar.xz` and `.tar.bz2`.

- **MDB_CREATE_DBS**
    
    This specifies databases to be created the first time the container
    comes up. You can specify multiple databases by separating their
    names with a single comma character (no spaces between them):
    ```
    [...] -e MDB_CREATE_DBS=db1,db2,db3 [...]
    ```
    The default is `monetdb`. If this variable is not empty,
    `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS` must also be set.

- **MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS**
    
    The password to use for the `monetdb` (admin) user in the databases
    created through `MDB_CREATE_DBS`. Note that all the databases get
    the same admin password. See also `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS_FILE`, which
    may be more secure. If neither `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS` nor
    `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS_FILE` are set, `MDB_CREATE_DBS` must be set to
    the empty string.

- **MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS_FILE**
   
    Variant of `MDB_DB_ADMIN_PASS`. Path to a file inside the container
    that contains the daemon password on the first line. This can be
    used for example with [Docker swarm
    secrets](https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/secrets/#how-docker-manages-secrets)
    or [Kubernetes secrets
    management](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#using-secrets-as-files-from-a-pod),
    or manually by mounting a volume that contains the password file.

- **MDB_FARM_PROPERTIES**
      
    A comma separated list of entries `key=value` to pass to the
    database farm. This is used in order to set properties like `port`,
    `exittimeout` etc. See [monetdbd manual
    page](https://www.monetdb.org/documentation-Jul2021/admin-guide/manpages/monetdbd/)
    for the full list of properties. Please note that the properties
    `listenaddr`, `control` and `passphrase` are not affected by this
    variable. `listenaddr` is always set to `all`, and the other two are
    set appropriately by setting the variable `MDB_DAEMON_PASS` or
    `MDB_DAEMON_PASS_FILE`.

- **MDB_DB_PROPERTIES**
   
    A comma separated list of entries `key=value` to pass to every
    database specified in `MDB_CREATE_DBS`. See the documentation of the
    `set` sub-command in the [monetdb manual
    page](https://www.monetdb.org/documentation/admin-guide/manpages/monetdb/)
    for the full list of properties.

### Note

There are situations where error messages produced at the startup of the
container are not immediately visible. For example when using Github
Actions, any error messages are shown at the end of the job in the
section _Stop containers_.

Another similar situation is at the command line when the container is
created in two steps using the commands `docker create` and `docker
start`. In that case you can access the error messages using the command
`docker logs <container name>`.

### Access

Once the image is running you can get a shell in it:
```
docker exec -it <image_name> bash
```

## Building the image manually

Clone this git [repository](https://github.com/MonetDBSolutions/monetdb-docker) and run:
```
docker build . -t <local tag>
```

Then you can use the image you just built as described in section
_Usage_ above.
